on april 5th
1975 a conference entitled
the central intelligence agency and
world peace
was held in new haven connecticut on the
campus of yale university
from one of the afternoon workshops of
the conference
john marks former state department
intelligence officer
and co-author of the bestseller the cia
and the cult of intelligence discusses
the publishing efforts of the cia
within the united states he also talks
about
multinational corporations as fronts and
sources of operating funds
for the central intelligence agency
john marks the cia's been getting a
relatively bad
name lately and in some ways that's just
not fair
i mean especially on the domestic
surveillance business let's get this
thing into perspective
okay the cia had 10 000 files
on domestic dissidents according to the
new york times
i'm perfectly willing to accept kirk
sales number of 35 000 files
but then let's turn to the new york city
police department and its red squad
which had a million files
in one city and you find in every city
in this country of oh
over 50 000 people that there was or
there was and is a red squad or an
intelligence division or in new york
they call it the bureau of special
services
but that virtually every police
department in this country
has an a unit a division or something
like that
for surveillance of citizens uh in
baltimore they've got a wonderful
scandal going on
where members of congress local
politicians as well as civil rights and
anti-war leaders were surveilled
in houston a member of congress was put
under surveillance
there's a similar scandal going on in
dallas and i'd be willing to bet that in
any city where you have somebody who
purports to be an investigative reporter
you can turn up that kind of scandal so
there are an awful lot of the
surveillance wasn't even being done by
the federal government
a lot of it was on the local level now
the fbi
as we all know through the
counterintelligence program or co-intel
pro
in their language was doing similar
things to disrupt
um anti-war movements the civil rights
movement
charming case out at the university of
arizona where a professor named mara
starsky
was up for uh renewal of his contract
and every member of the tenure committee
uh
received an anonymous letter sent by the
fbi
saying this guy was a really bad fellow
and listing all sorts of scurrilous
charges
professor starsky did not get tenure at
arizona university of arizona
uh we have the case down in in
mississippi where a civil rights leader
received an anonymous letter from the
fbi that purported to come from
something called the tougaloo defense
fund
and this uh the civil rights leader was
told that he better get out of the state
of mississippi if he wanted to stay
alive
and he left the state of mississippi
that was the fbi that did that kind of
thing and i don't think we've ever seen
ephraim zamballas jr on sunday nights
writing anonymous letters to get people
to leave the state of mississippi or to
get them fired from their jobs
but the fbi was into this in a very
heavy way
so when we talk about the cia and
domestic operations let's keep it in
perspective
i mean the cia was here it was doing bad
things
it was it was forbidden by its charter
which is the law the national security
act in 1947
from any domestic police or law
enforcement or internal security
functions
therefore everything or virtually
everything that the cia was doing in
this country was illegal
however the illegality was much greater
in terms of your local police the fbi
and maybe another 20 agencies of the
federal government i mean
we even find the post office was in it
the department of transportation has its
own little security police
the social security administration and
they had a wonderful argument in in the
the senate committee that's looking into
intelligence agencies on how many
intelligence agencies were there
and i don't know what they finally
decided but i do believe the figure is
over 20.
so let us keep the cia role in
perspective
because i think on the whole the cia
would just as soon be doing whatever it
does overseas
i mean which is not to say they don't do
a lot here and they haven't had a lot of
spillover
but these are the guys who kind of are
into making events happen
around the world i mean you know coups
in chile
uh presidents in costa rica uh armed
attacks in indonesia
i mean it's a very long laundry list
it's i used that word
this morning also it kind of gives
laundries a bad name but
the cia has been everywhere but a lot of
their support structures
and their clandestine structures are
based right here in the united states
and let me go into some of those one of
the things that offends me the most
is the cia's literary efforts their book
publishing
efforts i mean there have been books
that have appeared regularly in this
country
that have been subsidized and financed
by the good old central intelligence
agency
in 1967 frederick prager publishing
company
admitted to have published 15 or 16
books for the cia
perhaps their most famous literary
effort in this country was a book called
the pankowski papers
which you all might remember went right
up to the top of the bestseller list
about 1966 or 67
and was supposed to be the journal of
the soviet spy who had spied so
courageously for the cia
i'll tell you the fastest way to become
an ex-spy is to keep a journal
i mean that just isn't the way the game
is played and
pankowski did not write the penkovsky
papers
what pankowski did do was send into
various western intelligence officials
certain kinds of reports
on i mean it was good high-level soviet
intelligence kind of stuff
after he was uh captured and executed by
the soviet union
the cia wanted to reap a propaganda
windfall from this
um from this success they had had
because they've had almost no success
against the soviets anyway
and so the cia arranged for the
publication of this book
put in quite a bit that actually came
from penkowski's reports
and then added a lot of what they call
disinformation on top of it
disinformation is something information
that sounds like the truth has truth
mixed in it
but also is trying to get across some
ideas that just
aren't true and the the pankowski papers
was a fraud
in fact pankowski's whole role in the
damn thing was a fraud
because you know pankowski came up to
him the cia
a few years before he was actually
supposed to become a spy
and penkowski said to representatives of
the cia
i volunteer i want to spy for the cia i
mean he had his own reasons they
presumably were
sincere the cia told him well you know
we know about all those russian
provocations and tricks and deceptions
and
you're just too good to be true and we
don't accept i mean we're not going to
be fooled again
and then the british recruited penn
koski being i guess the british being a
little more cynical or less cynical or
whatever
and the british recruited pankowski made
him a spy
and then told the cia they had this real
hot wire and would the cia like to get
some of the action
except the british made us made the cia
pay for it they made
the cia furnish satellite photographs
which were coming in through some of our
most sensitive sources
so the cia actually had to pay or
blackmail
uh british intelligence in order to get
access to the man they had turned down
mr penkowski and of course pankowski is
supposedly the cia's greatest triumph
well
that's what triumphs are like in the cia
like to see some failures
um but the point i started off on was
the fact that the cia
was propagandizing the american people
with the publication of the pankowski
papers
a similar effort was in 1953 when the
mit center for
advanced international studies put out a
book called the dynamics of soviet
society
there were two versions of that book one
was the classified version which the cia
got for their own use and one was the
unclassified version which was published
by a good american publishing house and
distributed around the country
walt rostow participated in the writing
of that book i mean
in other words walt rostow took a cia
subsidy to write a book or partially
write a book called the dynamics of
soviet society
to establish an academic name that
brought him into the white house in the
60s and
brought us the war in vietnam and
anything else we can blame on wall
roster i mean i'm exaggerating this
point but the thing is
that you do have this incredible
movement back and forth from the
academic community certain sections the
academic community
into the us government with cia
overtones and it's just one big
interconnecting
web mess kind of thing uh as late as
1972 there was a book published by the
uni
center for advanced international
studies at miami university of miami
which dealt with latin american problems
cia operatives contributed to the
publication of that book
one was listed as a foreign service
officer but he is actually a cia man who
was on the campus at the university of
miami
you're going to find on other american
campuses extensive cia
operations uh yale is no exception
i mean though yale is the worst case
perhaps though if i were at harvard i
might have changed that
i mean really it's yale harvard and
princeton but yale does seem to be the
worst of all the
cia recruiting grounds in fact
that undercover agent who kirk
talked about a minute ago who was in the
new york city office
well he was recruited by william sloane
coffin into the cia
right off the yale campus i mean good
old traditional patterns
you find cia people on campuses
usually in the form of professors who
either served in oss or had some kind of
connection with the cia
and on a part-time basis do spotting for
the cia
now some of this is just to recruit
promising young conservative
uh american students of soviet society
to work for the analytical part of the
cia
i mean good phd candidates who can be
promised that kind of research work in
the cia with access to classified
information
i mean i don't get real excited about
that there's certain questions of
academic freedom i might want to get
into and everything else but i'm not
going to get real excited about that
you have other professors american
professors
on american campuses who are there to
spot
and recruit foreign students to be spies
for the cia
why do you recruit them on the yale
campus and not when they get back home
well here there are no local security
police americans fit in real well you
don't have to disguise yourself with an
ill-fitting red wig or anything of that
sort
i mean you can just be i don't know what
you can be and you can name your cover
on the yale campus you can be virtually
anything here
and professors are looking for foreign
students especially bright graduate
students from third world countries
who with a little bit of luck and a lot
of help from the cia
have a pretty good chance of rising
pretty fast in their governments back
home
if they're recruited at yale then
they're in on the payroll forever
and it's just an efficient way of doing
it so
foreign students in the united states
are a regular target
of the central intelligence agency that
one of the things that the domestic
operations division
does the cia's domestic operations
division is to recruit foreigners on
american campuses
you have other professors who have
entered into secret research
contracts and relationships with the cia
again some of this can be on
uh well pretty legitimate kinds of
things i mean you might have a
professor who is studying the future of
um
the wheat crop in the soviet union or
something like that again i'm not going
to get real excited about it except
relationships between college professors
and intelligence agencies should
probably be a matter of
an open matter i don't like the idea of
secret contracts
the contracts get signed with hew they
get signed with other agencies the
federal government
though they really are cia contracts you
also find p
professors on campus doing technical and
scientific research
which can vary from developing new
little secret
writing devices or secret weapons to how
you develop a better lens for a
satellite camera
again classified work under the cover of
a contract to another federal government
agency
but yet cia it's fairly extensive
uh now there's another way that
professors can work for the cia
and i get into this by sort of changing
subjects a bit
um we've written quite a bit and kirk
has just talked
about it about the cia's proprietary
network
cia proprietaries are companies which
look or purport to be private legitimate
enterprises but which in fact are
cia-owned or cia-controlled
the word they use in the cia is
proprietary so i'll use that word and i
hope you all
understand what i'm talking about the
cia has
several hundred of these proprietary
companies
operating in the united states and
overseas
the most famous ones are the cia
airlines uh air america is the worst
kept secret in the entire world i mean
there are others southern air transport
in miami
intermountain aviation in tucson civil
air transport in taiwan
oh there i could probably go on no i
can't go on because i'm under injunction
but
there are other cia air proprietaries
and these companies are very very
profitable
because the way you build up cover if
you're an airline is to act like an
airline i mean that's a truism
and that means chartering your planes to
people who want them
so the cia has one of the largest
charter businesses in the world
they charter their planes to other
government agencies
and to private companies for instance in
the 1971 bangladesh thing when the
united states with all its humanitarian
concern was sending grain to bangladesh
who got the contract from aid southern
air transport a cia proprietary
believe that one was worth two million
dollars uh the mechanics of
underbidding for a government contract
when you have a cia proprietary up
against
uh transworld airlines which may or may
not maybe
when you when you have uh you know a cia
airline
bidding against a real private airline i
mean i just don't know how that works
but i bet you could write some conflict
of interest stories that don't stop
i mean the the possibilities for inside
deals are incredible
i talked to a former vice president of
one of the cia airlines whose experience
was in the early 1950s
and he told me in about 1952 or 1953
the cia had 17 operational airlines in
the united states
and one of the things they were doing
was flying
american gis on their way to korea from
the east coast to the west coast
and you start thinking about this i mean
why couldn't a pan am or eastern have
had that contract
especially because the cia airline was
using air force planes which were being
loaned to it
and the only thing the only reason one
can think of
is that the defense department was just
shoving money over into the cia
the cia was literally earning a profit
on the open market
well these the airlines earn money from
other government agencies
they earn money from legitimate private
charters
bobby baker got in trouble because he
flew a cia airline
and on what he thought was a private
charter and that's how he first came to
the attention of government prosecutors
back in the uh the late 60s but the
point
i'm really trying to get at is the cia
is a profit making business
in itself it has revenues coming in from
these countries
these companies that exceed 200 million
dollars a year
uh it has a holding company called the
pacific corporation that owns air
america airasia and a few of the others
the pacific corporation last year
declared revenues of 48 million dollars
that was domestic operations they fly
more overseas than they do in this
country
so i can conceive of a time in this
country in this
uh country where congress might even cut
the cia appropriation
and the cia would say well that's okay
we'll just increase our business making
uh
potential i mean they have a source of
outside income
again the constitution that outmoded
document that it is
says that uh and i say that
sarcastically because it's not
uh but the constitution says only the
congress shall
appropriate funds it says nothing about
government agencies raising their own
funds on the private market
and i think you're going to find in the
press we'll be finding
as the cia scandal further unfurls
that the next area of major concern is
going to be the cia's financial dealings
uh the cia has been investing in the
stock market
the cia has been using money that comes
in through these commercial ventures in
all sorts of ways that a lot of people
in the press
do not yet understand but there it's
being worked on
and i think we're going to find some
conflict of interest that don't stop
when we get into this kind of thing just
to give you a nice little example
southern air transport was for years the
cia's air intervention arm
in latin america and two years ago the
cia decided it wanted to sell it off
mainly because its cover i think had
been blown so
terribly and uh so who did they want to
sell it to
they saw they they they started to sell
the company
the kind the company to the president of
in other words the chief operating
officer of southern air transport the
president stanley williams
was buying the company from the cia and
you talk about an inside deal i mean i
think that is the definition of an
inside deal
and the miami herald just had an article
about this about two weeks ago
and they pointed out that stanley
williams paid 2.1 million dollars
the president that he is stanley william
paid 2.1 million dollars to buy southern
air transport
which had assets of over four million
dollars and
you know they get away with this kind of
stuff because no one pays any attention
well i think some legal action is going
to be taken against that particular
transaction
but it also indicates this pattern of
kind of inside business dealings which
sometimes are tied directly into
american corporations as kirk sale
pointed out to you with the hughes
connections
but often the cia can accomplish their
their objectives within their own
businesses and these businesses do some
really interesting kinds of stuff
uh we discovered one i was working with
taylor branch of harper's magazine and
we've written about this so i mean
i don't know i mean it's not totally new
stuff but we discovered
a police training school about two
blocks off dupont circle in washington
dc
and for you who don't know it the whole
anti-war movement was
was located within those two blocks i
mean all headquarters of every anti-war
organization were around dupont circle
so
so was the cia's private police training
school
which was called international police
services incorporated
or as they called it impulse those well
that's an acronym for the initials
impulse trained several well thousands
of foreign policemen in the united
states who supposedly had come here for
private training
during that time when they were at
impulse specialized cia trainers would
teach people
in bugging techniques wiretapping
techniques surveillance techniques and
things of that sort
for those of you who heard what i said
this morning that same uh
uruguayan police captain who we kept
turning up his radio
was sent to impulse and got some of his
training right there and
right off dupont circle in washington dc
uh and so we all had been ranting and
raving for the last few years about
something called the international
police academy
which was run by the agency for
international development
and there had been a lot of charges
about c i a involvement well those
charges about cia involvement in the
international police academy were
perfectly true the cia
was behind the setting up of the
international police academy but the
thing was
there was another school just as big as
the international police academy
located about 12 blocks away which was
doing the same thing but even more
secretly because there was no open us
government contact
and that's why the c i a sets up its
private companies because it gets
another degree of cover another layering
away from the real source
uh i discovered another one of these
companies in washington dc on
connecticut avenue
which was called psychological
assessment associates
i wrote about that one in rolling stone
last summer and psychological assessment
associates
was a company that was doing
psychological research
and it was doing research in a field you
may never have heard about in your site
courses
because it was called indirect
assessment and that is the art of making
judgments about people
or testing people who do not know
they're being tested
which has not too much validity in the
laboratory but has a lot of validity in
the espionage world where you don't want
to tell people that you they're being
tested as you're recruiting them for a
spy or trying to decide whether they're
telling the truth
and what these people were doing at
psychological assessment associates
the cia front was looking for
correlations between
certain kinds of behavior patterns and
uh certain kinds of
uh things like whether they were telling
the truth or whether there were
vulnerabilities with the person and just
to give you a ridiculous example
i mean the kinds of things they were
doing was looking for twitches and
where people parted their hair and how
they reacted
to certain kinds of jokes and things of
that sort i mean kind of
the way you wear your hair the way you
are tonight said the cia
and they would try and correlate all
these things together and then make a
judgment
if a foreigner was vulnerable to women
or men or drugs or alcohol or whatever
and it was great for um this
psychological work that they i mean for
this espionage work that they were
trying to do
this gets me back to my college
professors because the reason you use a
company like psychological assessment
associates
is so you can get research from regular
straight college professors
who don't have to tell their colleagues
yeah i'm doing psychological research
for the cia
they say i'm doing it for this
washington consulting firm called
psychological assessment associates
so i mean one thing i would i would
suggest any budding investigators out
there to do is each time a cia front is
exposed
try and find out if there's anyone
around who's ever doing business with
them
because these organizations were being
used as cutouts
as separation from the real the main cia
and a lot of the information concerning
cia activities ties into these companies
rather than directly into the cia
and as an investigator i can tell you
that
that once you start unraveling the cia
network you find out it very easily
unravels because you find out that the
director one company is serving on the
board of another
company and you sit there with a dun and
bradstreet million dollar directory
and you literally can kind of spot the
cia companies from the people you know
who you who
were in the cia and get them from one to
the next
so the cia's domestic operations in this
country were not inconsiderable
an area which no one has touched on and
i've been given a ultimatum to get off
but
an area which i do want to touch on is
the fact that certain ethnic communities
in this country were considered fair
game for the cia
that meant anybody who came from
anywhere in eastern europe a poll a
ukraine a
ukrainian an estonian cubans
arab americans but large sectors of the
american population were thought to be
legitimate targets for the cia because
they might potentially have some
connections to the homeland well as far
as i know they never went after english
americans or german americans
or some of the western europeans but the
eastern europeans were fair game for the
cia
their communities and their
organizations in this country were
and still are regularly penetrated by
the cia
the cia seems to have a second a dual
concept of what american citizenship
is if you come from a country we don't
like so much now
you can be spied upon if you come from a
country which is one of our
allies in the english-speaking union
then they leave you alone i mean on
ethnic grounds
but that's something that shouldn't be
forgotten i mean we probably don't have
too many estonian americans in the room
but if i were an estonian-american i'd
be damn mad about it
i mean there was a charming court case
in baltimore a few years ago
where one estonian slandered another
estonian these are all americans now
estonian americans
one slandered another and the guy who
did the slandering went into court
and said my defense is that i was
ordered to do it by the cia
and sure enough then deputy director
helms submitted an affidavit saying yes
we ordered this
one estonian to slander the other
estonian because the second estonian was
a kgb
agent except they were all americans i
mean this was crazy
but the judge said oh that's okay as
long as you had an order from the
director of cia
and he threw the case out now presumably
that wouldn't happen today though i
wouldn't bet on it having had my own
experience with the federal judiciary
but at least the climate is improving
okay the overall point is the cia does
an awful lot in this country and i'm
awful
for more information on the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest
washington dc 2002
this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut